Have you ever had an important decision suddenly thrust on you?
You thought you knew the right thing to do, but as soon as you decide, you start having
second thoughts, maybe even regrets.
And now you can't stop thinking, did I do the right thing?
This tendency to repeat a thought over and over again is called rumination.
And when those thoughts make us feel anxious, it can be bad for our health.
Some of you students made tough decisions before you came to this class.
Thank you for that.
And everyone right now is faced with challenging decisions every day.
So what can we do to stop anxious rumination once it starts?
Well, open your Bibles with me to Psalm 37 verse 5, and notice the advice that is given
to us here, commit your way to Jehovah, rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.
Now the word for commit here literally means to roll or remove something from our life.
So as the footnote says, we need to roll our way, our concerns, our anxieties upon Jehovah.
When we ruminate anxiously, we're holding on to our problem.
But the Bible says through prayer, we have to take the problem off our shoulders and
put it on Jehovah's.
In other words, we no longer act as if the burden is ours.
We need to leave it in his hands.
It sounds so simple, but at times it's hard to do.
So what can help us when we have trouble letting go?
Well our suggestion today is to let Jehovah inspire you with awe.
Now to inspire someone means to make them feel that they want to do something and can
do it.
And it may be that Jehovah gave us the emotion of awe for that very purpose.
You may be wondering now, how can awe help me?
Well, open your Bibles again, this time to Genesis, chapter 28.
And let's look at an example together that illustrates how this can work.
In verse 10, we catch up with the patriarch Jacob.
He's on the road.
Notice, Jacob departed from Beersheba and kept going toward Herod.
Why was he going there?
Well, the main reason was to get away from his brother, Esau.
Why?
Because Jacob had just made a tough decision and Esau was mad.
You know the story, for most of his life, Esau despised the family birthright.
And that upset Jacob very much.
So at some point, he purchased the birthright from him.
Years go by.
And then one day, their father Isaac is getting ready to bless Esau as the first born.
Can you picture the scene?
What was Jacob going to do?
It's not possible today to know all the factors that influenced Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob
back then.
But the fact is, Jacob's decision put a strain on the whole family.
Esau began plotting to kill his brother.
And that's why Jacob was on the road.
Do you think he might have been ruminating a bit that day on what happened?
Did he perhaps have second thoughts?
Was he asking himself that I do the right thing?
Was it okay to fool my father?
What does Jehovah think of me now?
Those would have been reasonable questions.
Of course, we don't know what Jacob was thinking.
But if he was having second thoughts, what happened next must have helped him to stop
ruminating on them?
Notice what we read in verses 11 and 12.
In time, he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had
set.
So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down
there.
And look, there was a stairway set on the earth and its top reached up to the heavens.
And there were God's angels ascending and descending on it.
Now this heavenly ladder may have looked like a rising flight of stones, like the one
you see here in this illustration.
Jacob could see now that he was not alone.
He was a small part of an awesome organization.
And there's communication between the different parts of that organization, angels, minister
in some important way between Jehovah and humans who have his approval.
And there was more.
Let's continue in verse 13.
And look, there was Jehovah stationed above it.
And he said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham, your father, and the God of Isaac, the land
on which you are lying to you.
I am going to give it and to your offspring.
How comforting those words must have been to Jacob.
Jehovah wasn't displeased with him, quite the contrary.
He promised to bless Jacob in a marvelous way.
Jehovah apparently used this awesome experience to help Jacob to let go of any anxiety he might
have had.
As long as he continued to do his best, Jacob could trust Jehovah to do the rest.
What a relief.
This is reaction in verse 17.
And he grew fearful and added, how awe-inspiring this place is.
This can only be the house of God.
And this is the gate of the heavens.
Jacob's relief here is almost palpable.
He's no longer conflicted.
The vision inspires him to make a vow of loyalty to Jehovah forever.
You can read what he did and said in the latter part of this chapter.
Now verse 17 uses the same Hebrew word twice.
The first time, it's translated as fearful.
The second time, as awe-inspiring.
And that may be because awe is a surprising emotion.
It's a wonderful mix of inspiration and fear.
You sense you're in the presence of someone or something greater than yourself, but it
makes you feel small in a good way.
Awk and humble you, and that shifts your thinking.
It helps you to see things as they are and not as you expect them to be.
That's the kind of fear Proverbs 1 and 7 says, is the beginning of knowledge or wisdom.
And that may be why at times, Jehovah evokes awe in us.
Like Jacob, people often say they feel more centered and spiritual after an awesome experience.
Sometimes to pull us out of ourselves, it connects us on a deeper level with Jehovah.
And it reconnects us with what is most important.
Jehovah's sovereignty, his creation, and his people.
Now getting away from Issa did not end Jacob's problems.
There were other times in his life when he again became very anxious and afraid.
But true to his word, Jehovah was always there.
As long as Jacob was faithful, Jehovah made sure he would succeed.
Twenty years later when Jacob returned to Canaan with his family, Jehovah sent out a company
of angels to greet him.
How awesome was that?
Well, what does all of this mean then for you and me?
Psalm 89 7 says, Jehovah is awe-inspiring to all those around him.
If you've ever hiked in the Banff National Park, or walked in the Mure Woods, or felt
goose bumps as you looked up into the night sky, you know what awe feels like.
You've experienced Jehovah inspiring you.
So the next time you need to get out of your head, remember awe.
Take a walk in the woods, sing your favorite kingdom song.
awe may be the most underutilized way we know to help us to stop ruminating on anxious
thoughts and fully commit our way to Jehovah.
Let your problems stress you out.
Do your research, pray for guidance, make the best decision you can, and then let your
Jehovah inspire you with awe.